DOC: adding recs for conda env file creation & plugin installation (#114)
caporaso-lab/developing-with-qiime2: book/plugins/how-to-guides/maximize-compatibility.md

   - Your install instructions can indicate that a user should install whichever distribution you depend on (e.g., `tiny`, `amplicon`, or `metagenome`) and then illustrate how to install your plugin(s) in that environment however it makes sense (e.g., `conda` or `pip`). Complete install instructions are drafted for you in the `README.md` of plugins that you build using our template (see [](plugin-from-template)).
   - Alternatively, you can compose and share your own distribution of plugins (e.g., building from the `tiny` distribution) that captures the set of functionality you’d like to share.

Either of these approaches is totally fine, with the following caveat.

> The former is an easier starting point, and will allow us to provide more troubleshooting assistance for any installation issues that users may encounter. While the latter provides you with more flexibility in your environment construction, our assistance with any install issues or environment conflicts that users may run into will be more limited (and will ultimately be your responsibility to troubleshoot and resolve).

Reviewer: It's a bit of an odd convention, but we write this with one sentence per line. That just makes diffs easier to view, and the rendering engine ignores the single line breaks. Could you break this up so it's one sentence per line?

Author: Oh yeah, can do!

The easiest way to instruct users to install your plugin in the context of an existing QIIME 2 Distribution is to create an environment file that they will use to install the relevant distribution along with the correct version of your plugin, all while using a single command.

In the top-level directory of your plugin, create the following directory:

```
environment-files/
```

Within this directory, you'll create environment file(s) for current and/or past installable versions of your plugin. You can name them something like:

```
20XX.REL-<your-plugin-name>-environment.yml
```

The contents of your environment file should look something like this:

```
channels:
- https://packages.qiime2.org/qiime2/20XX.REL/<target-distribution>/passed
- conda-forge
- bioconda
- defaults
dependencies:
  - qiime2-<target-distribution>
  - pip
  - pip:
    - <q2_my_plugin>@git+https://github.com/<your-github-org>/<q2-my-plugin>.git@<target-branch>
```

With the following terms defined:
- 20XX.REL epoch corresponding to the QIIME 2 release version that your plugin is compatible with
- <target-distribution> being the distribution your plugin should be utilized with (i.e. amplicon, metagenome)

> - <q2_my_plugin> being the name of your plugin

Reviewer: I've been calling this the `module_name` in the cookiecutter (see [here](https://github.com/caporaso-lab/cookiecutter-qiime2-plugin/blob/main/cookiecutter.json)) - unless you think there's a reason not to, can you use that term here too for consistency?

Author: yep, can do!

- <your-github-org> either being the github organization your plugin is hosted under, or your personal github account name

> - <q2-my-plugin> being the name for your plugin on github

Reviewer: Similar to above, this is what I've been calling the plugin name.

Using the above guidelines, you can include the following example installation instructions for your users on your Github README page:
```
conda env create -n q2-my-plugin-env -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/<your-github-org>/<q2-my-plugin>/<env-file-branch>/environment-files/20XX.REL-<your-plugin-name>-environment.yml
```

With <env-file-branch> being defined as the branch of your plugin's github repository where the environment files are located (we recommend the main branch for this, just to keep things simple).

This method also provides an easy way for users to update their environment any time you create a new release for your plugin on Github. Using different branches on your repository as release locations, you can create a new environment file for each release with your plugin's install location reflecting the new target (i.e. release) branch.

As an example, your branch structure could look like the following:

```
release-2024.5
release-2024.10
```
Which would result in the following environment files (with amplicon as the target distribution):

2024.5
- Environment file name:

> `2024.5-q2-myplugin-environment.yml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`2024.5-q2-my-plugin-environment.yml`
```
(for consistency with the text above).

- Contents:
```
channels:
- https://packages.qiime2.org/qiime2/2024.5/amplicon/passed
- conda-forge
- bioconda
- defaults
dependencies:
  - qiime2-amplicon
  - pip
  - pip:
    - q2_myplugin@git+https://github.com/myplugin-org/q2-myplugin.git@release-2024.5
```

2024.10
- Environment file name:
`2024.10-q2-myplugin-environment.yml`

- Contents:
```
channels:
- https://packages.qiime2.org/qiime2/2024.10/amplicon/passed
- conda-forge
- bioconda
- defaults
dependencies:
  - qiime2-amplicon
  - pip
  - pip:
    - q2_myplugin@git+https://github.com/myplugin-org/q2-myplugin.git@release-2024.10
```

Users' initial install command would look like this:

```

> conda env create -n q2-myplugin -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/myplugin-org/q2-myplugin/main/environment-files/2024.5-myplugin-environment.yml

Reviewer: Similar to my suggestion above, this isn't consistent with the environment names above. I recommend keeping it consistent, just so readers aren't wondering if there is some reason for the difference.

While the latter provides you with more flexibility in your environment construction, our assistance with any install issues or environment conflicts that users may run into will be more limited (and will ultimately be your responsibility to troubleshoot and resolve).

With the above information in mind, below are examples of how we recommend constructing installation instructions for users for both of the discussed pathways.

1. Installing your plugin on top of an existing QIIME 2 Distribution (recommended)

The easiest way to instruct users to install your plugin in the context of an existing QIIME 2 Distribution is to create an environment file that they will use to install the relevant distribution along with the correct version of your plugin, all while using a single command.

In the top-level directory of your plugin, create the following directory:

```
environment-files/
```

Within this directory, you'll create environment file(s) for current and/or past installable versions of your plugin. You can name them something like:

```
20XX.REL-<module-name>-environment.yml

> ```

Author: I like it!

```
conda env create -n my-plugin -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/my-plugin-org/my-plugin/main/environment-files/2024.5-my-plugin-environment.yml
```

With the next release file looking identical aside from the branch name and target release (2024.10), users would then run the following command to update their existing 2024.5 environment:

```
conda env update -n my-plugin -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/my-plugin-org/my-plugin/main/environment-files/2024.10-my-plugin-environment.yml
```

Note that you may want to utilize a different branch location for your environment files than for each of your package releases (i.e. main branch on the repo vs. a specific release branch).
This will allow for all of your environment files to live in a singular location, for ease of reference.

2. Installing your plugin using the Tiny Distribution and any custom required plugins (not recommended)

If you are working on a unique plugin that is not compatible with one of our existing distributions (amplicon, metagenome) that has a few specific q2 plugin dependencies, you'll utilize a similar approach to install option 1 - just with a more customized environment file.

> As a reminder, while this approach is fairly straightforward to implement, we don't recommend this (if at all possible) because this will be more difficult for us to assist with and help users to troubleshoot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a reminder, while this approach is fairly straightforward to implement, we don't recommend this if the option presented above is possible for your plugin, because this will be more difficult for us to assist with and help users to troubleshoot.
```

  - qiime2-tiny
  - <my-plugin-dep-1>
  - pip
  - pip:
    - my_plugin@git+https://github.com/my-plugin-org/my-plugin.git@release-2024.5
```

With <my-plugin-deps-distro> corresponding to the distribution where the QIIME 2 dependencies for your plugin live, and <my-plugin-dep-1> being the QIIME 2 dependenc(ies) needed.
Note that if you have plugin dependencies spanning multiple distributions, you'll need to include each distribution's channel in your environment file.

The weekly development builds of the QIIME 2 distributions can help you make sure your code stays current with the distribution(s) you are targeting as you can automate your testing against them.
[](setup-dev-environment) will help you install the most recent successful development metapackage build (again, usually weekly, but sometimes the builds fail and take time to debug).

There are a couple of things that we recommend implementing to help you ensure that your plugin remains compatible within the QIIME 2 ecosystem:

1. Continuous Integration (CI) to regularly run your plugin's unit tests within the type of QIIME 2 environment where it should be used (i.e. Amplicon, Metagenome, Tiny plus custom selections).

> To implement this, you'll need to create a Github Action (GHA) that will be triggered each time you make a commit to your repository - either through a pull request (PR) or a direct commit to one of your remote branches.

Reviewer: Should this be templated in, in place of the one we already have in the cookiecutter?

Author: I've been going back and forth about this, and I'm kind of leaning towards having them implement this manually vs. having it get automatically added when they create their plugin. I think it's more beneficial to have them set this up when their plugin is actually ready to be automatically tested vs. before they have any functionality laid out in their repository. I could totally be convinced otherwise, but I think it might help them understand this process a bit better if they have to set it up themselves (esp since they need to create a matching environment file that probably won't exist right away). I also worry that if they do have this setup too soon and the action is failing, it'll be more confusing for them.

As an example, if the most current release was 2024.10, your 20XX.DEV version would be 2025.4.
  - Note that you will need to adjust the environment file versions within your two Github Actions with each new release (i.e. `ci-my-plugin` always needs to be targeting the current QIIME 2 release and `cron-my-plugin` always needs to be targeting the n+1 QIIME 2 release).
- <target-distribution> being (as defined earlier) the distribution your environment should be based on (i.e. Amplicon, Metagenome, Tiny).
- <dev-branch> being the main branch you're using for current development of your plugin.
This might commonly be the `main` branch on your Github repository, or something else (if you have a special branching structure set up) - but the main takeaway here is this is the location of your active development (i.e. latest features, bug fixes, improvements, etc).

You're welcome to set up any additional actions that you feel will be beneficial to your plugin and general development workflow - but the actions outlined above are what we recommend having in order to maintain an active and healthy plugin within the QIIME 2 ecosystem.

> You can request feedback on your plugin as a whole from more experienced QIIME 2 developers by reaching out through the {{ developer_discussion }}.

Reviewer: This should be a new section heading
